Hii Everyone.
So welcome to the yet another video on recursion problem.
So this time we are discussing the problem binary strings
The question is we need to count the number of binary strings, basically all the strings which are
formed using zero and one and with no consecutive.
ones that can be formed using a string of length N.
okay, for example, let's say if I give you N as to how many binary strings you can form, you
can form lets say 00, 01, 10, 11.
This is a binary string that is not valid in this case, so will cross it for N equal to two.
We have three binary string.
Okay.
And what about N equal to three?
So total we know we can form eight strings.
lets say we have 000.
It is valid, we have 001 valid 010.
Again valid.
Uh, 011.
Not valid.
Okay.
Or that's what we are going to have.
Or maybe we can have 101.
This is this is also valid.
Okay.
Invalid change would be 111 011 110 and 100.
It is also valid.
Okay.
We have one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight.
So out of 8
We we we don't have this one.
This is invalid.
We have one, two, three, four, five.
We have five strings which are valid.
Okay.
So a brute force.
way would be you generate all possible strings and then eliminate those which which are not valid.
But let us think if we can come up with a better algorithm to solve this.
So now let's try to break down this problem recursively.
So what I want.
I want to generate a string of length N, okay?
I want to generate a string of length N.
so what I can do is I can say okay, I will I can put the first bit the first letter as either one.
Or I can put that as zero.
I can.
Okay.
I'll put the first thing as one and I will count.
Let me just put this thing like this and let me say I will put the first thing as zero.
The first number is zero.
What what is going to happen in this case?
We are left with the remaining N minus one positions.
We are left with remaining N minus one position.
Here also we are left with remaining N minus one positions.
What I can do, I have two options at the first index and we are trying to form sup problem.
If you put the first number as zero, then you clearly know that the remaining sub problem can be solved.
If I said the total number of ways form number of binary string without consecutive ones for this problem
of size.
N if this answer is a f(n), okay I can say this answer would be nothing but f of n minus one.
Okay.
Because you can put zero here, one here.
It doesn't matter.
You can put anything.
That will not matter.
But this sub problem will make sure that there are no consecutive ones in this array of size N minus
one.
But here there is a problem.
If you put a one here, okay, there would be a consecutive one and that would lead to an invalid case.
So what do you need to do?
You need to say that this position would always be zero.
If you have one at the first index, then the next index must be zero.
Then what are you going to do?
Now, this is a very similar problem.
Now you have you have a fixed zero.
Here you have a fixed a zero here.
Okay.
And what you can see.
We can solve this problem, which is of the size N minus two.
In a f of N minus two ways.
Okay.
So now it doesn't matter whether we put a zero here or one here, but this recursive property will make
sure that we don't have consecutive ones in this array of N minus two.
So we have no consecutive ones here.
So what we can say f(N) nothing but sum of these to cases F(N-2) + F(N-1)
so you can say and f(N-1) + f(N-2)
What would be the smallest case if N is zero we can say one, the null array is one way
If N is one, there are how many ways.
There are two ways.
Okay.
Either we put it as zero or we put it as one.
If N is two.
We saw that there are three ways.
So if you use the recurrence, that F of two is nothing.
but f of N minus one that is F of zero, plus f of one.
Okay.
So this is coming to be how much 1 + 2
That is three.
That's great.
What about.
N = 3, so for N = 3
We know we're making a call on 2 and 1.
The three plus two is five.
And we just saw the example that for, N equal to three we have five ways and for N equal to four it
would be five plus three 8 ways and so on.
So this is how you can easily solve this problem.
You can use recursion.
And if you know about a little bit about dynamic programming, you can top down or bottom UP DP
to improve the complexity of the recursive solution.
Okay, so what would be the complexity of the recursive solution?
So you are making two calls at every node N minus one.
N minus two.
N minus three N minus four.
And this is going to take order of how much two raise to power N because it is very same as
fibonacci order of two raise to the power N time.
But using memoization, this can be reduced to linear complexity as well.
And using matrix
exponentiation, which you have already learned.
Okay, you have already learned.
But maybe if you have not learned, okay.
Depending upon if you know your technique to solve linear occurrences, you can also reduce it down
to order of K cube log N, so k is the number of terms on which this N is depending.
Okay.
And this is this is 2 in this case.
So order of 8 into log of N this can be solved in logarithmic time as well.
Okay.
If you use this technique matrix exponentiation for linear occurrences.
If you're learning the basics of data structures, you're not supposed to know this.
But if you're doing competitive programming, you are supposed to know this technique.
And this is the basic recursion complexity.
If you use DP, it can be done in order of N.
And using matrix exponentiation, it can be done in order of k cube.
Log of N time.
I hope that is clear to you.
And that's all for this video.